## GLOSSARY

- **.DCD FILES**: File used to view an MD simulation or other trajectory generated by CHARMM.
- **.PDB FILE**: Protein Databank File that contains coordinates and bond information of a molecule or system.
- **ABSOLUTE REFERENCES**: File or directory path that originates at the root directory of the Linux system.
- **ADOPTED-BASIS NEWTON-RAPHSON (ABNR)**: A derivative method of minimization best suited for large systems.
- **CHARMM**: A molecular simulation program developed by Chemistry at HARvard Macromolecular Mechanics.
- **CLIPPING PLANE TOOL**: A VMD tool used to view cross-sections of molecules of interest.
- **COMPARISON SET**: A coordinate set used to compare differences, apply constraints, and more to a system of interest.
- **CONDITIONAL STATEMENTS**: Used to execute portions of a script based on user-defined criteria.
- **CONJUGATE GRADIENT (CONJ)**: A minimization procedure somewhat more optimized and calculation-intensive than SD.
- **CONSTRAINT FORCE**: The force required to keep a reactant at a specific point in a reaction coordinate.
- **CONSTRAINTS**: Energy terms that apply a restoring force, allowing one to confine a selection to certain coordinates.
- **ENERGY MINIMIZATION**: A set of procedures that changes atom coordinates to find local minima.
- **FATAL **: A CHARMM error that forces the stream file to exit prematurely.
- **FORTRAN LOGICAL UNIT NUMBER**: A temporary read/write space used by CHARMM when executing stream files.
- **FREE-ENERGY PERTURBATION**: A method for measuring the F.E. difference (often ΔG) as a molecule changes one state to another.
- **HOMOLOGY MODELING**: A modeling method used to construct a protein from a sequence differing slightly from a template.
- **INFLUENZA A M2 CHANNEL**: A tetrameric, proton-selective channel protein that is essential to viral replication.
- **INSERT MODE**: A mode used in Linux Vi to add, remove, and edit text. Accessed by pressing `i` in Vi.
- **LOG FILE**: A log file shows the results of the CHARMM or NAMD simulation file and is essential for troubleshooting.
- **LOOP**: A loop is a portion of a script which repeats according to user-specified conditions.
- **MOLECULAR DYNAMICS**: Simulations that contain a dynamic component which varies over time; e.g. heat, pressure, etc.
- **ORTHOGRAPHIC MODE**: A VMD display mode which removes persective and portrays objects using constant dimensions.
- **PATCH**: A CHARMM feature that allows for the PSF of a segment to be manipulated.
- **PDB ID**: A unique identification code given to every molecular structure on the RCSB Protein Databank.
- **PERIODIC BOUNDARIES**: Takes a region of a system and creates copies of itself around it. Most useful for molecules in solvent.
- **PERSPECTIVE MODE**: A VMD display mode which portrays objects with dimensions that vary with distance from the viewer.
- **PRINCIPLE STRUCTURE FILE (PSF)**: Contains important bonding information for the structure of segments in CHARMM.
- **RCSB PROTEIN DATABANK**: A commonly used online repository of 3D structures such as proteins, nucleic acids, etc.
- **RELATIVE REFERENCES**: Linux paths that originate in the directory of command execution.
- **RENDER**: A VMD command which creates a bitmap snapshot of the OpenGL scene window.
- **REPRESENTATION**: User-defined display properties given to a selection of atoms in VMD.
- **RESIDUE TOPOLOGY FILE (RTF)**: A file which defines the type, mass, and charge of atoms in each reside, allowing for PSF generation.
- **RESTART FILES**: MD output files that contain information for continuing a trajectory.
- **RMSD**: Root-mean-square deviation, often used in simulations to determine the difference between structures or conformations or to restrain atoms.
- **SELECTION**: A CHARMM procedure for applying calculations, changes, etc. to specific atoms in a system.
- **SLURM**: A Linux scheduling system used for submitting multiple jobs to CHARMM on Marylou and Wolf.
- **STEEPEST DECENT (SD)**: A minimization procedure that locates the nearest local energy minimum for a structure.
- **STEREO VISION**: A VMD display mode which overlaps two images of an object, creating an illusion of a 3D shape.
- **STREAM FILE**: An input file (usually with the extension .str) which, when executed, submits input to CHARMM.
- **TSM**: A CHARMM procedure that facilitates the conversion of one molecule to another in free-energy perturbation.
- **UMBRELLA POTENTIAL**: A constraint used in umbrella sampling procedures for determining binding energy between molecules.
- **VARIABLE**: A character string which is assigned a user-determined value and reusable.
- **VMD**: 3D Molecular visualization software used for analyzing biomolecular systems.
- **WILDCARD**: A character with specific interpretations in the Unix shell. Includes characters such as `?`, `*`, `~`, etc.

**[Return to home page](https://busathlab.github.io/mdlab/index.html)**